---
layout: beg
title: Git
category: Backend Engineer Guide
permalink: /backend-engineer-guide/git
---

# Git

[Git](http://git-scm.com/) is a free and open source distributed version control system.

## Installation

Use homebrew:

```
$ brew install git
```

To work with our repositories:

1. Signup at [https://git.wixpress.com/](https://git.wixpress.com/) and login
2. In the dashboard, click `Manage SSH keys`
3. Select `Add SSH key`
4. Copy the contents of `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` and past into the box and save
5. You'll need to be granted permission to be able to push to a repo, ask a team leader

See more configuration in the Configuration section below.

## Usage

1. Easily find the git repo page for a project thru [http://lifecycle.dev.wix/](http://lifecycle.dev.wix/)
2. From the git page, copy the git url: `git@git.wixpress.com:...`
3. Clone to your local environment (from cmd line): `$ git clone git@git.wixpress.com:...`
4. Commit changes: `$ git commit -m "The commit message"`
5. Push changes (remember, they are local until you push): `$ git push`

There are many git clients, and you can also use it from within IntelliJ.


## Introduction To Git

Adapted from the [Pro Git book](http://git-scm.com/book) (section 2.3 Git Basics), written by Scott Chacon and published by Apress (which is available under [Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial Share Alike 3.0 license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/))

### A Different VCS

The major difference between Git and any other VCS (Subversion and friends included) is the way Git thinks about its data. Conceptually, most other systems store information as a list of file-based changes. These systems (CVS, Subversion, Perforce, Bazaar, and so on) think of the information they keep as a set of files and the changes made to each file over time.

Git doesn’t think of or store its data this way. Instead, Git thinks of its data more like a set of snapshots of a mini filesystem. Every time you commit, or save the state of your project in Git, it basically takes a picture of what all your files look like at that moment and stores a reference to that snapshot. To be efficient, if files have not changed, Git doesn’t store the file again—just a link to the previous identical file it has already stored.

This is an important distinction between Git and nearly all other VCSs. It makes Git reconsider almost every aspect of version control that most other systems copied from the previous generation. This makes Git more like a mini filesystem with some incredibly powerful tools built on top of it, rather than simply a VCS.

### (Almost) Everything Is Local

Most operations in Git only need local files and resources to operate — generally no information is needed from another computer on your network. If you’re used to a CVCS where most operations have that network latency overhead, this aspect of Git will make you think that the gods of speed have blessed Git with unworldly powers. Because you have the entire history of the project right there on your local disk, most operations seem almost instantaneous.

For example, to browse the history of the project, Git doesn’t need to go out to the server to get
the history and display it for you—it simply reads it directly from your local database. This means you see the project history almost instantly. If you want to see the changes introduced between the current version of a file and the file a month ago, Git can look up the file a month ago and do a local difference calculation, instead of having to either ask a remote server to do it or pull an older version of the file from the remote server to do it locally.

This also means that there is very little you can’t do if you’re offline or off VPN. If you get on an airplane or a train and want to do a little work, you can commit happily until you get to a network connection to upload. If you go home and can’t get your VPN client working properly, you can still work. In many other systems, doing so is either impossible or painful. In Perforce, for example, you can’t do much when you aren’t connected to the server; and in Subversion and CVS, you can edit files, but you can’t commit changes to your database (because your database is offline). This may not seem like a huge deal, but you may be surprised what a big difference it can make.

### Integrity

Everything in Git is check-summed before it is stored and is then referred to by that checksum. This means it’s impossible to change the contents of any file or directory without Git knowing about it. This functionality is built into Git at the lowest levels and is integral to its philosophy. You can’t lose information in transit or get file corruption without Git being able to detect it.

The mechanism that Git uses for this checksumming is called a SHA-1 hash. This is a 40-character string composed of hexadecimal characters (0–9 and a–f) and calculated based on the contents of a file or directory structure in Git. A SHA-1 hash looks something like this:

```
24b9da6552252987aa493b52f8696cd6d3b00373
```

You will see these hash values all over the place in Git because it uses them so much. In fact, Git stores everything not by file name but in the Git database addressable by the hash value of its contents.

### States

Git has three main states that your files can reside in: committed, modified, and staged. Committed means that the data is safely stored in your local database. Modified means that you have changed the file but have not committed it to your database yet. Staged means that you have marked a modified file in its current version to go into your next commit snapshot.

This leads us to the three main sections of a Git project: the Git directory, the working directory, and the staging area.

The Git directory (`.git` at the project's root) is where Git stores the metadata and object database for your project. This is the most important part of Git, and it is what is copied when you clone a repository from another computer.

The working directory is a single checkout of one version of the project. These files are pulled out of the compressed database in the Git directory and placed on disk for you to use or modify.

The staging area is a simple file, generally contained in your Git directory, that stores information about what will go into your next commit.

The basic Git workflow goes something like this:

1. You modify files in your working directory.
2. You stage the files, adding snapshots of them to your staging area.
3. You do a commit, which takes the files as they are in the staging area and stores that snapshot permanently to your Git directory.

If a particular version of a file is in the git directory, it’s considered committed. If it’s modified but has been added to the staging area, it is staged. And if it was changed since it was checked out but has not been staged, it is modified.

### Configuration

Now that you have Git on your system, you’ll want to do a few things to customize your Git environment. You should have to do these things only once; they’ll stick around between upgrades. You can also change them at any time by running through the commands again.

Configuratio files:

* `/etc/gitconfig` file: Contains values for every user on the system and all their repositories ("system")
* `~/.gitconfig` file: Specific to your user ("global")
* `config` file in the git directory (that is, `.git/config`) of whatever repository you’re currently using: Specific to that single repository

Each level overrides values in the previous level, so values in .git/config trump those in /etc/gitconfig.

#### Identity

Set your user name and e-mail address. This is important because every Git commit uses this information, and it’s immutably baked into the commits you pass around:

```
$ git config --global user.name "John Doe"
$ git config --global user.email john@wix.com
```

#### Editor

Configure the default text editor that will be used when Git needs you to type in a message. By default, Git uses your system’s default editor. If you want to use a different text editor, such as Emacs, you can do the following:

```
 $ git config --global core.editor emacs
```

#### Diff Tool

Configure is the default diff tool to use to resolve merge conflicts. Say you want to use vimdiff:

```
 $ git config --global merge.tool vimdiff
```

Git accepts kdiff3, tkdiff, meld, xxdiff, emerge, vimdiff, gvimdiff, ecmerge, and opendiff as valid merge tools. You can also set up a custom tool.

#### Checking Your Settings

If you want to check your settings, you can use the git config --list command to list all the settings Git can find at that point:

```
 $ git config --list
```

You may see keys more than once, because Git reads the same key from different config files. In this case, Git uses the last value for each unique key it sees. You can also check what Git thinks a specific key’s value is by typinggit config {key}:

```
$ git config user.name
```

#### Help

There are three ways to get the manual page (manpage) help for any of the Git commands:

```
$ git help <verb>
$ git <verb> --help
$ man git-<verb>
```

For example:

```
$ git help config
```

These commands are nice because you can access them anywhere, even offline.

### Basic Commands

#### Initializing A New Repository

If you’re starting to track an existing project (directory with files) in Git, you need to go to the project’s directory and type:

```
$ git init
```

This creates a new subdirectory named .git that contains all of your necessary repository files — a Git repository skeleton. At this point, nothing in your project is tracked yet.

If you want to start version-controlling existing files (as opposed to an empty directory), you should probably begin tracking those files and do an initial commit. You can accomplish that with a few git add commands that specify the files you want to track, followed by a commit:

```
$ git add .                                 # adds all files
$ git commit -m 'initial project version'   # performs a commit with a message; detailed in next sections
```

At this point, you have a Git repository with tracked files and an initial commit.

#### Cloning

If you want to get a copy of an existing Git repository the command you need is git clone. If you’re familiar with other VCS systems such as Subversion, you’ll notice that the command is clone and not checkout. This is an important distinction — Git receives a copy of nearly all data that the server has. Every version of every file for the history of the project is pulled down when you run git clone:

```
$ git clone [url]
```

For example, the Scala language library from GitHub:

```
$ git clone git@github.com:scala/scala.git
```

That creates a directory named "scala", initializes a .git directory inside it, pulls down all the data for that repository, and checks out a working copy of the latest version. If you want to clone the repository into a directory named something other than grit, you can specify that as the next command-line option:

```
$ git clone git@github.com:scala/scala.git my-scala
```

Git has a number of different transfer protocols you can use: the `git://` protocol, `http(s)://` or `user@server:/path.git`, which uses the SSH transfer protocol (the previous example).

#### Status

The main tool you use to determine which files are in which state is the git status command. If you run this command directly after a clone, you should see something like this:

```
$ git status
# On branch master
nothing to commit (working directory clean)
```

This means you have a clean working directory — in other words, there are no tracked and modified files. Git also doesn’t see any untracked files, or they would be listed here.

Let’s say you add a new file to your project, a simple README file. If the file didn’t exist before, and you run git status, you see your untracked file like so:

```
$ git status
# On branch master
# Untracked files:
#   (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
#
#  README
nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

You can see that your new README file is untracked, because it’s under the “Untracked files” heading in your status output. Untracked basically means that Git sees a file you didn’t have in the previous snapshot (commit); Git won’t start including it in your commit snapshots until you explicitly tell it to do so. It does this so you don’t accidentally begin including generated binary files or other files that you did not mean to include.

#### Adding New Files

In order to begin tracking a new file, you use the command git add. To begin tracking the README file, you can run this:

```
$ git add README
```

If you run the status command again, you'll see that the README file is now tracked and staged (because it's under the "Changes to be committed" section). If you commit at this point, the version of the file at the *time you ran* git add is what will be in the historical snapshot. The git add command takes a path name for either a file or a directory; if it’s a directory, the command adds all the files in that directory recursively.

#### Staging Modified Files

If you change a previously tracked file called benchmarks.rb and then run your status command again, you get something that looks like this:

```
$ git status
# On branch master
# Changes to be committed:
#   (use "git reset HEAD <file>..." to unstage)
#
#  new file:   README
#
# Changed but not updated:
#   (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
#
#  modified:   benchmarks.rb
#
```

The benchmarks.rb file appears under a section named “Changed but not updated” — which means that a file that is tracked has been modified in the working directory but not yet staged. To stage it, you run the `git add` command (it’s a multipurpose command — you use it to begin tracking new files, to stage files, and to do other things like marking merge-conflicted files as resolved).

The files (benchmark.rb, README) are staged and will go into your next commit. At this point, suppose you remember one little change that you want to make in benchmarks.rb before you commit it. You open it again and make that change, and you’re ready to commit. If you run `git status` again you'll see benchmark.rb listed as both staged and unstaged. **This is important**: It turns out that Git stages a file exactly as it is when you run the git add command. If you commit now, the version of benchmarks.rb as it was when you last ran the git add command is how it will go into the commit, not the version of the file as it looks in your working directory when you run git commit. If you modify a file after you run git add, you have to run git add again to stage the latest version of the file.

**Make sure you understand the last paragraph. If you don't – ask someone.**

#### Ignoring Files

You can create a file listing patterns to match files in the repository you want ignored, named `.gitignore`. Here is an example `.gitignore` file:

```
*.[oa]
*~
```

The first line tells Git to ignore any files ending in .o or .a. The second line tells Git to ignore all files that end with a tilde (~). You may also include a log, tmp, or pid directory; automatically generated documentation; and so on.

The rules for the patterns you can put in the .gitignore file are as follows:

* Blank lines or lines starting with # are ignored
* Standard glob patterns work
* You can end patterns with a forward slash (/) to specify a directory
* You can negate a pattern by starting it with an exclamation point (!)

Glob patterns are like simplified regular expressions that shells use. An asterisk (*) matches zero or more characters; [abc] matches any character inside the brackets (in this case a, b, or c); a question mark (?) matches a single character; and brackets enclosing characters separated by a hyphen([0-9]) matches any character between them (in this case 0 through 9).

#### Committing

Remember that anything that is still unstaged — any files you have created or modified that you haven’t run git add on since you edited them — won’t go into a commit. They will stay as modified files on your disk.

The simplest way to commit is to type:

```
$ git commit -m "your commit message"
```

You'll see that the commit gives you some output about itself: which branch you committed to, what SHA-1 checksum the commit has, how many files were changed, and statistics about lines added and removed in the commit.

Remember that the commit records the snapshot you set up in your staging area. Anything you didn’t stage is still sitting there modified; you can do another commit to add it to your history. Every time you perform a commit, you’re recording a snapshot of your project that you can revert to or compare to later.

If you want to skip the staging area, Git provides a simple shortcut. Providing the `-a` option to the git commit command makes Git automatically stage every file that is already tracked before doing the commit, letting you skip the git add part.

#### Removing Files

To remove a file from Git, you have to remove it from your tracked files (more accurately, remove it from your staging area) and then commit. The `git rm`command does that and also removes the file from your working directory so you don’t see it as an untracked file next time around.

If you simply remove the file from your working directory, it shows up under the “Changed but not updated” (that is, unstaged) area of your git status output.

Another useful thing you may want to do is to keep the file in your working tree but remove it from your staging area. In other words, you may want to keep the file on your hard drive but not have Git track it anymore. This is particularly useful if you forgot to add something to your .gitignore file and accidentally added it, like a large log file or a bunch of .a compiled files. To do this, use the -- cached option:

```
$ git rm --cached readme.txt
```

#### Moving Files

In Git, instead of renaming a file you move it (like in Linux). If you want to rename a file in Git, you can run something like:

```
$ git mv file_from file_to
```

Alternatively, you can move/rename the file with an external tool and Git will figure it out.

#### Changing Your Last Commit

If you want to try that commit again (add files, change commit message, etc.), you can run commit with the --amend option:

```
$ git commit --amend
```

This command takes your staging area and uses it for the commit. If you’ve made no changes since your last commit (for instance, you run this command immediately after your previous commit), then your snapshot will look exactly the same and all you’ll change is your commit message.

As an example, if you commit and then realize you forgot to stage the changes in a file you wanted to add to this commit, you can do something like this:

```
$ git commit -m 'initial commit'
$ git add forgotten_file
$ git commit --amend
```