---
layout: beg
title: Maven
category: Backend Engineer Guide
permalink: /backend-engineer-guide/maven
---

# Maven

[Apache Maven](http://maven.apache.org/) is a software project management and comprehension tool. Based on the concept of a project object model (POM), Maven can manage a project's build, reporting and documentation from a central piece of information.

Wix's Maven repository can be found here: [http://repo.dev.wix/](http://repo.dev.wix/) (accessible thru local office network or with an active VPN connection).

## Installation

Use homebrew:

```
$ brew install maven
```

## Configuration

1. Open [http://repo.dev.wix/](http://repo.dev.wix/)
2. From the left menu, select `Maven Settings` under `Client Settings`
3. Keep all the default settings and click `Generate Settings`
4. Save the generated xml file to `~/.m2/settings.xml`

## Introduction To Maven

Adapted from the ["Maven For Beginners"](http://www.scala-lang.org/old/node/345.html) guide (2008) on scala-lang.org.

### POM

Maven projects are defined by their "Project Object Model" or pom. This file is located in the base directory of a Maven project and is called pom.xml. The Project Object Model includes a lot of different information:

* The name/description of the project
* The style/packaging of the project
* The version of the project
* The dependencies (libraries or otherwise) of the project
* The configuration for the build (plugins, directories, etc.)
* The configuration for reports (test coverage, static analysis, etc)
* The developers/contributors for the project (name, email, etc.)
* The Infrastructure (source Ccntrol repository, continuous integration Server, issue tracker) for the project
* The Maven repositories used for the project

In addition to all this, POM files are object-oriented and may inherit from one parent. By default, all Maven projects inherit from the Maven "master pom". The master pom defines the standard build layout/configuration for Maven projects. You can override/extend this behavior in your project pom if desired.

Here's an example Maven pom file for a scala project:

```
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/maven-v4_0_0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <groupId>com.wixpress</groupId>
    <artifactId>my-app</artifactId>
    <packaging>jar</packaging>
    <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
    <name>Demo of Maven for Scala</name>
    <url>http://wix.com</url>
    <repositories>
        <repository>
            <id>scala-tools.org</id>
            <name>Scala-tools Maven2 Repository</name>
            <url>http://scala-tools.org/repo-releases</url>
        </repository>
    </repositories>
    <pluginRepositories>
        <pluginRepository>
            <id>scala-tools.org</id>
            <name>Scala-tools Maven2 Repository</name>
            <url>http://scala-tools.org/repo-releases</url>
        </pluginRepository>
    </pluginRepositories>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.scala-lang</groupId>
            <artifactId>scala-library</artifactId>
            <version>2.10.2</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>junit</groupId>
            <artifactId>junit</artifactId>
            <version>4.11</version>
            <scope>test</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
    <build>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>org.scala-tools</groupId>
                <artifactId>maven-scala-plugin</artifactId>
                <executions>
                    <execution>
                        <goals>
                            <goal>compile</goal>
                            <goal>testCompile</goal>
                        </goals>
                    </execution>
                </executions>
                <configuration>
                    <sourceDir>src/main/java</sourceDir>
                    <jvmArgs>
                        <jvmArg>-Xms64m</jvmArg>
                        <jvmArg>-Xmx1024m</jvmArg>
                    </jvmArgs>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>
</project>
```

Notes about the POM file:

* `modelVersion` – This element is always the same and is required
* `groupId` – Corresponds to the inverted domain-name of the project
* `artifactId` – A unique id for the project (within the group)
* `version` – Represents the current version of the project
* `name` – The human-readable name of the project
* `url` – The url for the project website
* `packaging` – Defines the "style" of project your building (e.g. ear, jar, war, etc.)
* `dependencies` – Specifies the dependencies of the project
* `repositories` – Specifies alternative locations for Maven to look when materializing dependencies
* `pluginRepositories` – Specifies alternative location for Maven to look when materializing build plugins
* `build` – Specifies configuration on *how* to build the project

### Directory Layout

```
project/
    pom.xml             # Defines the project
    src/
        main/
            java/       # Contains all java code that will go in the final artifact
            scala/      # Contains all scala code that will go in the final artifact
            resources/  # Contains all static files that should be available on the classpath in the final artifact
        test/
            java/       # Contains all java code used for testing
            scala/      # Contains all scala code used for testing
            resources/  # Contains all static content that should be available on the classpath during testing
```

Although the above represents the default layout for most scala projects, every Maven plugin used could bring in its own "convention" for where it would like to see code.

### Build Lifecycle

The Maven build lifecycle is made up of "phases" and "goals". A "goal" is a various action defined by a plugin. Examples include `scala:compile`, `jetty:run-war` and `jboss:deploy`. Goals are specific to a particular Maven plugin and perform a single operation. Phases on the other hand are more abstract ideas, and represent particular points in a standard build system.

Here's a listing of some of the phases for a Maven build:

* `validate` – Validate the project is correct and all necessary information is available
* `compile` – Compile the source code of the project
* `test` – Test the compiled source code using a suitable unit testing framework. These tests should not require the code be packaged or deployed
* `package` – Take the compiled code and package it in its distributable format, such as a JAR
* `integration-test` – Process and deploy the package if necessary into an environment where integration tests can be run
* `verify` – Run any checks to verify the package is valid and meets quality criteria
* `install` – Install the package into the local repository, for use as a dependency in other projects locally
* `deploy` – Done in an integration or release environment, copies the final package to the remote repository for sharing with other developers and projects

In reality, there are many more phases defined. For a complete listing, [read here](http://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-the-lifecycle.html#Lifecycle_Reference).

When operating Maven on the command line you can type `$ mvn` plus a list of goals and/or phases. These will be executed in the order defined. Some phases may depend on other phases, such that they do not need to be specified. For example, package depends on test. This means you cannot package your software unless all your tests pass, and packaging will always attempt to build. When specifying goals on the command line, the goal will execute immediately with no dependencies.

### Build Plugins

One of the great features of Maven is that there's a build plugin for almost any activity required in a Java/Scala project. These plugins are defined in the project/build/plugins section of the pom. Most build plugins automatically attach their goals to appropriate build phases when used, however this is configurable.

### Dependencies

One of the powerful features of Maven is declarative dependencies. Maven allows projects to declare what dependencies they have, and will automatically materialize those dependencies (including transitive dependencies – "dependencies of dependencies").

Each dependency consists of several items:

* `groupId` – The group of the dependency to rely on
* `artifactId` – The artifact in the group to rely on
* `version` – The version of the dependency to rely on
* `scope` – The "scope" of the dependency, defaults to `compile`
* `packaging` – The packaging for the dependency, defaults to `jar` (e.g. jar, war, ear)

The default Maven repository has a website that allows you to search for dependencies called: [http://search.maven.org/](http://search.maven.org/) or [http://mvnrepository.com/](http://mvnrepository.com/). Most open source projects are available either via the "central" Maven repository or a separately hosted Maven repository (e.g. jboss host's their own repository).

Dependencies in Maven have scope. The scope determines when/where the dependency will show up in the classpath. Here are the commonly used scopes:

* `compile` – The dependency is available when compiling/running/testing the project and as a transitive dependency
* `runtime` – The dependency is available when running/testing but not for compilation. Runtime dependencies show up as transitive dependencies
* `test` – The dependency is available during testing phases, but not compilation or (non-testing) runtime. Test dependencies do not show up as transitive dependencies
* `provided` – The dependency is available during compilation, but not runtime. e.g. You expect the servlet-api will be provided by a servlet container and therefore should be a "provided" dependency

More information (and scopes) available [here](http://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Dependency_Scope).

### POM Inheritance

Pom file inheritance works similarly to how single-inheritance works in an OO language. The child POM inherits all configuration items of its parent, and can override/extend them with its own configuration. This is done through specifying a pom with a packaging of "pom", and then using the "parent" tag in a child project. This can greatly reduce the amount of configuration done in "child" projects (often times a child project pom only specifies its parent and the artifact/group/version triplet).

To make a pom file "abstract":

```
<project xmlns=...
    ...
    <groupId>com.wixpress</groupId>
    <artifactId>scala-parent</artifactId>
    <packaging>pom</packaging>
    <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
    <name>Scala "Abstract" Parent Project</name>
    ...
    <repositories>
        ...
    </repositories>
    <pluginRepositories>
        ...
    </pluginRepositories>
    ...
</project>
```

Below is a pom file for a normal scala project that makes use of the "abstract pom" defined above:

```
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/maven-v4_0_0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <groupId>com.wixpress</groupId>
    <artifactId>my-app</artifactId>
    <packaging>jar</packaging>
    <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
    <parent>
        <groupId>com.wixpress</groupId>
        <artifactId>scala-parent</artifactId>
        <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
    </parent>
</project>
```

Notice how information no longer needs to be repeated in the pom. This is particularly useful when creating multi-module projects. Simply put, multi-module projects are nested projects where you can execute a lifecycle command in the parent that will recurse into all children.

To see what a pom looks like after inheritance and profiles (next section) are applied, run:

```
$ mvn help:effective-pom
```

### Profiles

A pom file can use "profiles". Simply put, profiles are similar to traits. A profile gets applied to a class (an inheriting pom file) when a certain condition applies. For example, a filter can be defined so that the profile applies when the "src/main/scala" directory exists. This means projects without a src/main/scala directory that inherit the profile will *not* have the profile apply to their lifecycle.

For example:

```
...
    <packaging>pom</packaging>
    ...
    <profiles>
        <profile>
            <id>Scala Project</id>
            <activation>
                <file>
                    <exists>src/main/scala</exists>
                </file>
            </activation>
            <dependencies>
                ...
            </dependencies>
            <build>
                <plugins>
                    ...
                </plugins>
            </build>
        </profile>
    </profiles>
...
```

### Settings.xml

The settings.xml file contains elements used to define values which configure Maven execution in various ways, like the pom.xml, but should not be bundled to any specific project, or distributed to an audience. These include values such as the local repository location, alternate remote repository servers, and authentication information.

There are two locations where a settings.xml file may live:

* The Maven install: `$M2_HOME/conf/settings.xml` ("global settings")
* A user's install: `${user.home}/.m2/settings.xml` ("user settings")

If both files exists, their contents gets merged, with the user-specific settings.xml being dominant.

See [http://maven.apache.org/settings.html](http://maven.apache.org/settings.html) for more about settings.

### More

There are many more advanced topics we that aren't covered here, which you are free to research on: deploying artifacts, project reporting, advanced profiles and more.

## IntelliJ

* Make sure IntelliJ has the Maven plugin installed
* `*.pom` files make for IntelliJ projects (select them when opening an existing project)

### Overriding a dependency with a local version

Maven automatically fetches your project's dependencies from the artifactory. If you want to use a local version of one of your dependencies (in case you're working on two separate jars simultaneously, for example) do the following.

In the *dependency* IntelliJ project:

1. Open the `Maven Projects` tool window
2. Under the desired jar, expand the `Lifecycle` menu, right-click `install` and select `Run Maven Build`
3. This "installs" your edited version of the jar to your local Maven repository, so it can be accessed by the other project

In the project which depends on the dependency jar we just installed locally:

1. Open the `Maven Projects` tool window
2. Click the `Toggle Offline Mode` button (the icon of a blue pipeline cut-off in the middle)
3. This tells Maven to work in offline mode: "On each launch, Maven visits the remote repositories and checks for updates. Executing a Maven command can result in downloading new archives and changing Maven itself. When you switch to offline mode, Maven has to use those resources that are available locally, and report about the problems, if something is missing."

Effectively, this allows you have your own version of the dependency, without Maven using the remote repository's version.
